===PAGE 1 ===
DRAFT: Open Pool Questions
Advanced Algorithms
At least 30% of the final (and midterm) exam questions will be drawnverbatimfrom this pool.
Lecture 1: Stable Marriage
Question 1.Stable Matchings
This set of questions captures the learning goals of the first lecture on the stable marriage problem.
1. Define an Euler Tour and show that every connected graph with all even degrees must have an
Euler Tour.
2. Define the term stable marriage problem, blocking pair and stable matching.
3. Define the Greedy Algorithm as in the lecture and show that it might run forever.
4. Explain the Gale Shapeley algorithm and show that it returns a stable matching.
5. Define a men optimal stable matching. and show that the Gale Shapeley algorithm returns a
men optimal stable matching.
Lecture 2: Min Flow Max Cut
Question 2.Minimum Vertex Cut
Show that determining the maximum flow in a network with arc and vertex capacity constraints
can be reduced to an ordinary maximum-flow problem on a flow network of comparable size.
Question 3.Escaping a Grid
Ann×ngrid is an undirected graph consisting ofnrows andncolumns of vertices as shown in
the figure. We denote the vertex in theith row andjth column byv i,j. All vertices in a grid have
exactly four neighbours, except for theboundarypoints, which are the verticesv i,j withi= 1,i=n,
j= 1 orj=n.
Givenm≤n 2 starting pointsv x1,y1,...,v xm,ym in the grid, thegrid escape problemis to determine
if there aremvertex disjoint paths from the starting points to anymdifferent points in the boundary.
Figure 1: Grids for the grid escape problem. Starting points are the larger black disks; other grid
vertices are smaller circles. The first grid is shown with a solution the the grid escape problem; the
second has no solution
Describe an algorithm with running time polynomial innthat solves the escape problem and
analyse its running time. (Be careful thatnandmdescribe the size of the grid and number of
starting points, not the number of vertices and arcs as usual).
Lecture 3: Min Flow Max Cut
1
===PAGE 2 ===
Question 4.Phasing out capital equipment
A shipping company wants to phase out a fleet of (homogeneous) general cargo ships over a period
ofpyears. Its objective is to maximize its cash assets at the end of thepyears by considering the
possibility to prematurely selling ships and temporary replacing them by ships they rent.
The company faces a non-increasing demand for ships: every year, the number of ships needed is
at most the number needed the previous year. Letd(i) be the number of ships needed in yeari. The
company can possibly have more thand(i) ships in yeari, but may not have less than these.
If a ship is sold in yeari, this yieldss i euros. Each ship the company has in yearigivesr i euros
as profit. If the company has less thand(i) ships in yeari, it must hire additional ships. This costs
hi in yeari. Assume thath i>r i for eachi.
The company wants to meet its commitments (have sufficient ships either owned or rented each
year), and have as much cash assets as possible at the end of thepth year.
Formulate this problem as a minimum cost flow problem.
(Exercise 9.6 from Network Flows, Ahuja, Magnanti, Orlin.)
Lecture 4: Planar Graphs
Question 5.Planar Graphs
This set of questions captures the learning goals of the lecture on the planar graphs. We assume
thatGis a planar graph onnvertices andmedges.
1. Give and proof the Euler Formula.
2. Show thatm≤3n−6 and the average degree below 6.
3. Define graph minors and state the Kuratowski theorem.
4. Show that planar graphs are 5-colorable.
5. Show thatK 33 is non-planar in an elementary way.
6. State the Planar Separator Theorem.
7. Show that 3-coloring can be solved in 2 O(√n) time on planar graphs.
8. Show that 3-coloring is NP-hard for planar graphs.
Lecture 5: Real Models of Computation
Question 6.Real Models of Computation
This set of questions captures the learning goals of the lecture on real models of computation.
1. Explain a program on a word RAM. (Not a formal definition.)
2. Explain a Turing machine. (Not a formal definition.)
3. Give a comparison of advantages and disadvantages of the two models.
4. Explain what a program on a real RAM is and give both a motivation and concerns about this
model of computation.
5. Show how to computek! inO(log 2k) time on a real RAM that is allowed to use rounding.
6. Show how to compute the greatest common divisor gcd(a,b) of two numbers inO(min loga,logb)
time on a real RAM that is allowed to use rounding.
7. Show that we can find a factor of a number in polynomial time on the real RAM that is allowed
to use rounding. You are allowed to use the the answer of the previous two questions.
8. Define a straight line program andPosSLP.
9. Show that P PosSLP = PR.
Lecture 6: Matching
2
===PAGE 3 ===
Figure 2: A graph with a cycle cover and a graph without a cycle cover
Question 7.
Consider the following problem:
Partition into Cycles
Instance:Undirected graphG= (V,E).
Question:Can we partitionGinto cycles, i.e., is there a collection of simple cycles
C1,...C r inG, such that each vertex belongs to exactly one of the cycles in the collec-
tion?
Give a polynomial time algorithm that solves this problem.
Lecture 7: Existential Theory of the Reals
Question 8.Existential Theory of the Reals
This set of questions captures the learning goals of the first lecture on the existential theory of the
reals.
1. Give a definition of the algorithmic problemETRand the complexity class∃Rbased on this
definition.
2. Give the machine model description of∃Rand a sketch of a proof that it is equivalent with the
logic based definition.
3. Show that NP⊆∃R.
4. Define the order types and the order type problem. Give a motivation to study order types.
5. DefineETR-AMas in the lecture and show that it is∃R-complete.
6. Define thePartial Order Type Problem. Suppose that we can use order-types to also
enforce pairs of lines, defined by two points each, to be parallel. Show that thePartial Order
Type Problemis∃R-complete.
Lecture 8: Exact Exponential-Time Algorithms
Question 9.Exact Algorithm for Exact 3-SAT
Suppose we have a set of Boolean variablesx 1,...,x n, a set of clauses, where each clause is a
subset of{x 1,...,x n,not(x 1), . . . , not(xn)}, and each clause has at most three literals (elements). In
theExact 3-Satisfiability, we want to determine if there exists a truth assignment such that each
clause hasexactlyone true literal.
For instance, if we have clauses{x 1,x 2,x 3},{not(x 1),x 2,x 4}, then settingx 1 to true,x 2 to false,
x3 to false, andx 4 to true is a solution. Also, settingx 1 andx 2 to true does not lead to a solution, as
the first clause has two literals that are true.
1. Show that we can create a reduction rule using polynomial time that transforms an instance
ofExact 3-Satisfiabilityinto an equivalent smaller instance ofExact 3-Satisfiability
where all clauses have size two or three. (Smaller means, not increasing the number of variables
or clauses)
3
===PAGE 4 ===
2. Show that we can create a reductio rule using polynomial time that transforms an instance of
Exact 3-Satisfiabilityinto an equivalent smaller instance ofExact 3-Satisfiabilitywhere
all clauses have size exactly three. (Smaller means, not increasing the number of variables or
clauses)
3. Give an exponential-time algorithm that solves theExact 3-satisfiabilityproblem. Analyse
the time of your algorithm. Your algorithm should useO ∗(cn) time for somec<2.
Question 10.Bisection Width
Consider the following problem.
Given:GraphG= (V,E), with|V|even.
Question:Find a partition ofVinto two setsV 1,V 2, with|V 1|=|V 2|=|V|/2, such that
the number of edges with one endpoint inV 1 and one endpoint inV 2 is as small as
possible.
This problem is NP-complete, and anO∗(2n) algorithm is trivial. Find an efficient exact algorithm
for this problem with running timeO ∗(cn) for somec<2.
Lecture 9: Existential Theory of the Reals
Question 11.Exact Algorithm for Exact 3-SAT
1. Describe point-line duality.
2. Show the above-below property of point-line duality.
3. Define the cyclic order of a point with respect to a point set. Describe what the cyclic order
corresponds to in the dual.
4. Define geometric intersection graphs and unit disk graphs in particular.
5. Show that deciding whether a given graph is a unit disk intersection graph is∃R-complete.
6. Show thatOptimal Curve Straighteningproblem is∃R-complete.
Lecture 10: Inclusion/Exclusion & Approximation
Question 12.Inclusion/exclusion for set cover
LetUbe any set of sizem(m=|U|), and letFbe a set of subsets ofU. A set coverC⊂Fis
a set of sets that together cover all sets inU, i.e., S
S∈CS=U. A minimum set cover is a set cover
using the smallest number of sets fromFas possible.
Give anO ∗(2m) time and polynomial-space algorithm that counts the number of minimum set
covers ofF.
Question 13.Approximation non-symmetric TSP
Suppose we have an instance ofTravelling Salesman Problemthat is not symmetric but still
fulfils the triangle inequality. I.e., batery usage by an electric car in an mountainous area. We know
that for every two citiesiandj, we have thatd(i,j)≤2d(j,i), and of course,d(j,i)≤2d(i,j).
Give ac-approximation algorithm for this problem that runs in polynomial time.
Lecture 11: Approximation Algorithms II
4
===PAGE 5 ===
Question 14.Approximating Steiner Tree
LetG= (V,E) be an undirected connected graph, letT⊆Vbe set of vertices called theterminals,
and letN=V\Tbe the non-terminal vertices. In theSteiner Treeproblem, we are asked to
compute a minimum-size set of edgesS⊆Esuch thatSconnects all vertices inT. That is, if we let
V(S) be the set of endpoints of edges inS, then (V(S),S) is a tree withT⊆V(S)⊆Vconnecting
the vertices inT, where it is allowed to use vertices fromNas intermediate vertices in the tree.
1. Prove that the procedure below is a 2-approximation toSteiner Tree.
Define the complete graphG T = (T,F) to be a graph on the terminal verticesT, withF=
{{u,v}:u∈T,v∈T,u̸=v}and cost functionc:F→N, where the cost of edge{t 1,t 2}∈F
equals the length of the shortest path fromt1 tot 2 in the original graphG. Also, defineP({t 1,t 2})
be the set of edges underlying such a shortest path fromt 1 tot 2 inG.
Consider the following algorithm for Steiner tree: givenG= (V,E) andT, first computeG T
and a minimum spanning treeM⊆FonG T w.r.t. to the cost functionc, and then output the
edge set: [
m∈M
P(m)
Note that a minimum spanning tree is a minimum cost edge set connectingallvertices in the
graph.
2. Prove that there is no FPTAS for Steiner tree unlessP=NP.
You do not need part 1 to prove this, and partial points will be awarded if you prove the weaker
statement that no additive-constant-factor approximation exists unlessP=NP.
Lecture 12: Parametrized Complexity I
Question 15.
1. Define a parameterized problem, FPT, XP, and para-NP-hard.
2. Describe the idea of a branching algorithm in general.
3. DefineVertex Coverand show thatVertex Covercan be solved in FPT time using a
branching algorithm.
4. DefineCluster Editingand give a branching algorithm for it.
5. Give one parameterized problem that is para-NP-complete.
6. Define the notion of a kernel.
7. Show that a problem is FPT if and only if it has a kernel.
8. Show thatVertex Coverhas a kernel of sizeO(k 2).
9. DefineConvex String Recoloringand show that it has a kernel of sizeO(k 2).
10. Define theDirectedk-Pathproblem and acyclic graphs. Show thatDirectedk-Pathcan
be solved in polynomial time on acyclic graphs.
11. Explain what a constant one-sided error algorithm is. Show that there is a constant one-sided
error algorithm forDirectedk-Pathwith running timeO(k k·n c, for some suitable constantc.
Lecture 13: Treewidth
Question 16.Treewidth of grid graphs
Thepbyqgrid graphGR p×q is the graph (Vp×q,E p×q), withV p×q ={v i,j|1≤i≤p∧1≤j≤q},
andE p×q ={{v i,j,v i+1,j}|1≤i<p∧1≤j≤q}∪{{v i,j,v i+1,j}|1≤i<p∧1≤j≤q}.
Show, by giving a construction of a tree decomposition, that the treewidth of apbyqgrid graph
withp≤qis at mostp.
5
===PAGE 6 ===
Question 17.Treewidth and cliques
A clique in a graphG= (V,E) is a subset of the verticesC⊆Vsuch that for any pair of vertices
c1,c 2∈Ctheir is an edge between the vertices inG:{c 1,c 2}∈E.
Show that for any tree decompositionTofG,Tmust have a bagX i for whichC⊆X i. Conclude
that the treewidth ofGis a least|C|−1.
Lecture 14: Complexity for Approximation and FPT
Question 18.L-reduction for Maximum Cut on Multigraphs
We consider the approximation complexity of theMax Cut on Multigraphsproblem and the
Max Not-All-Equal 3-SATproblem.
A multigraphG= (V,E) is a graph that can contain multiple identical edges. Given a multigraph
G= (V,E), a cut (V 1,V 2) inGis a partitioning of the verticesVinto two setsV 1,V 2 (V1∩V 2 =∅,
V1∪V 2 =V). The value of the cut (V 1,V 2) is the number of edges (u,v)∈Ewith one endpoint in
V1 and one endpoint inV 2. In theMax Cut on Multigraphsproblem, we are given a multigraph
and we are asked to compute a cut with maximum value. See Figure 3 for an example.
Figure 3: Example of a multigraph with a cut defined by the white and the grey vertices. This is not
a cut of maximum value.
In theMax Not-All-Equal 3-SATproblem, we are given a set of variablesXand a set of
clausesCover the variablesX(clauses that can have literalsxand¬xfor variablesx∈X), where
each clause consists ofexactly two or three literals. In this problem, a clauseC∈Cis satisfied by
a truth assignmentϕ, if at least one literal inCis made true byϕand at least one literal inCis
made false byϕ. The question in this problem is to compute a truth assignment that satisfies the
maximum number of clauses. In this question you may use the fact thatMax Not-All-Equal
3-SATis APX-complete.
Prove thatMax Cut on Multigraphsis APX-hard by giving an L-reduction fromMax Not-
All-Equal 3-SAT.
Lecture 15: Kernelization and Randomized Algorithms
Question 19.Vertex Cover Kernel
•DefineInteger Linear Programmingand show howVertex Covercan be encoded as an
Integer Linear Programming.
•Show thatVertex Coverhas a linear sized kernel. (If this question comes up in the exam, we
will ask for only part of the proof.)
•Define 2list coloringand show that it can be solved in polynomial time.
•Using the answer to the previous question describe a randomized constant one-sided error for
3-coloringa graph with runtimO(1.5 n).
6
